# 202_final_project

Usage: `python main.py`

An artist’s discography typically includes a variety of song types; for example, they might have songs that are upbeat and high energy as well as songs that are slower and more melancholy. Therefore, when users attempt to create playlists based on an artist, they may be targeting a specific song type from the artist rather than the entirety of their discography. Currently, there are several methods in which a user can create a playlist. On Spotify, for example, a user can create a playlist based on an artist, a song, or even an entire playlist; there is no method in which a user can provide further specification such as song type. These user-created playlists, however, often do not match the user’s expectation or are comprised of seemingly unrelated songs (for example, some songs may be high energy while others might be slow ballads). In order to build playlists that more accurately represent the user’s interests, we created a system that takes an artist and a song feature and returns a playlist of songs that best match the desired sound. We create these playlists through organizing the song resources by their feature similarity to a subset of songs from the desired artist that possess a high degree of the user-selected song feature. This report details the process for retrieving and building attribute criteria around a user’s stated preference as well as retrieving and organizing resources according to the similarity of their attributes to our developed criterion. 

For this system, we leveraged Spotify’s Web API. We chose to use Spotify’s API because it provided ready access to an extensive collection of key data, namely artist discographies, related artists, and song features. This allowed us to build a practically significant organization and retrieval system based on music data within the time and resource constraints we faced. While there are open-source music catalogs, such as MusicBrainz, using such a data source would have limited our possibilities since there is no organization around related artists, genre, or song features. Next, even if MusicBrainz readily provided such information, the format in which it is distributed, PostgreSQL, falls outside the expertise available on our team. Given our knowledge of Python, working with a web API was much more feasible in the timeframe available. A final issue with MusicBrainz was its lack of audio analysis data based on the music files themselves. This would have made organizing around track features infeasible for our team due to lack of expertise in signal processing and availability of data. Thus, working with the Spotify Web API abstracted away much of the complexity associated in working with music data and allowed the team to move quickly to build a differentiated organizing system.

Our retrieval system begins with a command-line interface that takes in three user inputs: an artist name, a Spotify song feature, and a measurement of the feature (high or low). The output of the system is a Spotify playlist. To achieve this goal, we query the Spotify API in a way that will ultimately build a CSV of the audio features for all tracks in the user-specified artist’s discography and a song pool CSV which includes the discography of their related artists. This data is then entered into our organizing system to generate a list of recommended songs based on the song feature requested by the user (e.g., high energy). In other words, once we collect the discographies of artists related to the one the user specifies, our organizing principle is to collect songs that match the user-specified song feature and measurement (such as high danceability or low energy). Once our organizing system returns a list of recommended songs, we then create a playlist on Spotify using their API which is accessible through a user’s account.
